Hi I’m Senator Frank Wagner I’m also a
candidate for governor of Virginia.
We're here with Senator Frank Wagner, State
Senator from Virginia Beach a longtime legislator
he actually served in the House of Delegates
in the early 90s maybe you can tell us a little
bit about your career in the general assembly.
Sure.
After I sold my first company I had a non-compete
on me for four years and I think like most
everybody I was very concerned about what
I saw going on in government and said I really
have the opportunity to to run for office
when will I take that opportunity?
That was 1991 and I won that election and
I've been in the legislature ever since.
That's right.
And in that time you see a lot of changes
in Richmond I guess.
Well I when I first started serving it was
25 years ago Governor Wilder was the governor.
I've been through Democrat governors Republican
governors Democrat controlled legislature
with Democrat governor Republican controlled
legislature.
So virtually every combination that you could
possibly come up Republican control with the
Republican governor and it's been just tremendous
opportunity to to work all sides.
But I've tried to focus on issues that I believe
my constituents and really all of Virginia
does based on my background which is going
to the Naval Academy heavily involved in Navy
engineering plans.
I was a hardhat diver in the Navy but I was
also an engineer and duty officer.
So I try to bring the expertise and the skill
sets that I learned in the Navy along with
my private sector business experience to bear
as I take a look at issues up in Richmond
and try to move forward on those issues that
actually help promote the economy grow the
economy and diversify the economy in Virginia.
And tell us about your business background.
You're in ship building right?
Ship repair ship repair.
When I left naval service it was 1982.
I worked for yard for one year and decided
this is a great opportunity why don't I get
into business myself.
So I started up a business by myself worked
primarily as a consultant.
I was then able to start get industrial work
and started hiring some of the people that
I work with welders, ship fitters, pipefitters,
really the people that make Virginia run.
Brought a crew around that had worked for
me in a previous yard and we built that company
from scratch up to 100 people and sold that
in 1989.
But I think more importantly it draws on a
lot of what I want to talk about during the
campaign.
Of course you've got deep roots in Hampton
roads you're very well known in that area
and.
You also have roots in northern Virginia.
Absolutely.
I went to Woodmont Elementary in Arlington
Stratford junior high.
I graduated from Washington and Lee High School
so I grew up in northern Virginia with the
exception of my my dad's one year military
service out in Fort Hood, Texas before he
retired.
I've been in Virginia all my life.
So what's your window into how the economy
is doing these days.
Virginia of course its very dependent on government
spending and defense contracting in particular.
We have to produce a balanced budget so revenues
are very much driven in our Commonwealth by
sales taxes and income taxes which is directly
relevant to the State of the economy really
shows up and government spending is a huge
part of Virginia's economy.
Obviously my area defense spending is very
very important.
The thing that's concerned me an entire time
that I've been there 25 years we've never
taken the good times.
We just kind of relax and that's not the time
to relax that's the time we should have focused
on diversifying Virginia's economy because
the more diverse your economy is the better
you're able to weather these turn downs and
recessions when they come or a Washington
developed recession if you will by curtailing
government spending.
So we have got to build up our industrial
base in Virginia diversify our economy build
up our manufacturing base and attract more
and more high tech industry not use use what
the high tech brings us from the government
to be able to commercialize a lot of that
high tech capture that business in Virginia
continue to grow our economy.
You know it's interesting that the economy
is an issue is in this campaign Governor McAuliffe
would argue the unemployment rate is coming
down 3.9 percent.
Why is the economy an issue in Virginia when
on the surface appears to be doing pretty
well?
Numbers don't lie.
OK.
And remember what I just told you are our
revenues are based on income taxes and sales
taxes.
We walked into this session a $1.2 billion
deficit directly related to income taxes and
sales tax collections in Virginia.
The economy is sputtering.
In Virginia at best you can say yes we're
at 3.9 percent.
That leaves out the fact that a lot of people
gave up looking for work and a lot of people
are working at low paying jobs and those type
so leaves out that fact but those numbers
those revenue collections don't lie.
The $1.2 billion deficit was very very real
and that's a reflection of the economy.
We do not have a transportation system adequate
for the economy today.
So how can one talk about growing the economy
or diversify an economy without an investment
in transportation.
Now those in Northern Virginia in my neck
of the woods we feel it every day and congestion
so they will with what's going on in Southside
Virginia?
You know that you know there's no traffic
there.
Why do they have a transportation problem.
Well they do because the economy is is not
sputtering.
If you drive down through there is basically
it looks like a recession perhaps depression
yet you cross the border in North Carolina
in Winston-Salem and Greensboro and the economy
is on fire.
Just 30, 40 miles away and you ask yourself
why?
You know why is that going on.
Well North Carolina has made the investment
in an interstate highway system in North Carolina
has made an investment in broadband and consequently
their economies.
You know it's the same people 30, 40 miles
apart.
Their economy is on fire.
Our is not.
that's just a classic example.
Now why should people in Northern Virginia
care.
I'll tell you why.
$800 for every man woman and child in Fairfax
County goes to Richmond and doesn't come back
to northern Virginia.
It goes to treat symptoms of a bad economy.
More social programs more more.
You know money for education because it reduce
class sizes because people are leaving are.
More money that would otherwise be coming
to northern Virginia.
It's going down there to treat symptoms not
the cause of the disease but the symptoms.
I'm here to cure the disease.
Let's make those investments in broadband
let's make those investments in interstate
highway and transportation network and let's
return Southside back to the manufacturing
base that it was -it used to sustain Northern
Virginia with textiles, with furniture, with
tobacco.
Well those are gone.
One of your rivals for the republican nomination,
Ed Gillespie, has put out down tax plan that
calls for a 10 percent cut in the income tax.
Can you talk about that, do you have thoughts
on the tax policy in Virginia?
Well let's let's first of all just review
what I just said.
I think our tax policy is extremely competitive
with the rest of the states.
Go look and compare state by state by state.
I pay a lot of taxes.
I would love to have a tax cut.
But the reality of what I just told you is
we just closed a $1.2 billion deficit.
We're not the federal government.
We can't print money.
We can't go out and borrow money.
We have to have a balanced budget.
And so that $1.2 billion we can talk about
an income tax cut which I would love.
Flies in the face of that.
We have a $6 billion imbalance in our Virginia
retirement system.
I don't want us to be like Illinois.
I don't want us to be like New Jersey.
I want to make sure that we have the money
available to fund that so we don't lay off
a huge huge problem on the next generation.
I've dealt with this for 25 years.
I understand the structural balance of what
goes on in the state government.
I understand just how much that we have cut
out of agencies how much we cut and it shows
up it shows up in higher tuitions.
It shows up in many things shows up in the
fact that we can't keep state police on the
police force until we just address the pay
issue there.
These are real problems that we face day in
and day out.
I can't mislead people.
Now I think it either shows a lack of understanding
of what's going on which is to be expected.
He doesn't know anything about what's going
on in state government or it or he doesn't
you know or he understands but he but he's
going out there and saying well I'll say anything
do anything to try to get elected.
I can't do that.
It's just not in my makeup to go out there
and say anything or try anything to get elected.
I want to talk about the real problems and
my ideas for real solutions.
But I can sit here and look at Virginia now
and say if we're truly going to turn the economy
around I don't think a proposed tax cut on
down the road -you know two three years if
it hits certain revenue if you read the fine
print of this thing is going to achieve it.
I do think making a bigger investment in transportation.
And I'll tell you one more thing and you see
it every day and the more I travel around
the state and talk to people this is a problem
we have in our education system that I believe
is nationwide.
We have put together a system in Virginia
called the standards of learning which is
wonderful if you want to go to college.
And we've done it at the expense of career
technical education.
And so what I'm proposing and made a major
part of my campaign is around sixth grade
seventh grade.
We make parents and the students aware of
the opportunities and career technical education
and we provide the resources and the instructors.
So if a student wants to pursue career technical
education as opposed to a traditional college
bound.
We have the groundwork we have the basis for
them to start down that road to pursue a career
technical education.
We make that fundamental change in education
in Virginia.
We're going to grow like you've never believe
Now you've got a skill set.
But I'll tell you another secret.
Those with a good career technical education
are making more money than a college graduate
is today.
And one more thing.
They have jobs and a lot of college graduates
can't find jobs right now and they don't carry
student loans that the college graduates have.
And that's going to be a huge national problem.
The fact the amount of student loans on the
books and the amount of non-performing student
loans is an issue that Washington D.C. is
going to have to deal with.
But I want to see Virginia start making and
recognizing where the jobs are.
It seems like a centerpiece of your case for
running for governor is your experience 25
years in the legislature.
You know how Richmond works.
It seems a little at odds with what we saw
last year where there was a real you know
there was this success of the outsider on
both for Bernie Sanders and Donald Trump who
course won.
Do you feel that that's your case of experiences
is out of step at all with what Virginia's
for now.
Is there groundswell of wanting to elect an
outsider to come in and shake things up?
Well I'll compare this.
You know I think obviously a whole lot of
people around the country thought Washington
D.C. was heading in the wrong direction.
OK.
I think people in Virginia think Virginia
is OK.
But needs to be set in the right direction.
And let me say one more thing my principal
opponent Ed Gillespie is a D.C. lobbyist.
I mean he is the ultimate Washington insider.
His record of lobbying for Enron and doing
those things and using his power in relation
with the White House to profit and make money
on the outside.
You know Donald Trump talked about draining
the swamp.
You know that is the swamp and that's what
a lot of people rebelled against.
Just quickly your other opponent for the Republican
nomination, Corey Stewart said that the fate
of confederate statues in cities in Virginia
is one of the central issues of the campaign.
Do you agree with that?
I think our heritage and our history is very
important and I don't you can't rewrite history.
In fact you learn from history and I think
was Santana said those who fail to learn from
history are doomed to repeat the mistakes
in the future.
So I think our heritage is very important
and certainly Virginia has a heritage and
I think the more people learn you know we've
had some great leaders.
But like most great leaders they have had
flaws and we need to learn from that.
But I think an attempt to do away with these
things to pretend they never happened to hide
them is a mistake.
I really truly believe that's a mistake.
And I can understand the sensitivity issue.
I understand the sensitivity but if we learn
from history then maybe we won't make the
same mistakes that were made before.
And we have to recognize that great leaders
have flaws they have flaws.
Stewart of course was affiliated with the
Trump in Virginia for much of the race last
year.
What's your feeling about the Trump administration
and its start so far and what that means for
Virginia.
Would you be looking as Governor to work with
the ministry to further somethings that have
already started such as You know the immigration
tightening, looking at federal spending cuts
that kind of thing?
Let me just say a few things.
First of all jobs and the economy let's focus
on that if the defense spending comes through.
Obviously it will be a boon for my area down
in Hampton Roads but it'll be a boon for northern
Virginia as well.
Will the boon be big enough to offset perhaps
some of the lay offs in some of the other
agencies that that represent many folks in
Northern Virginia?
Until Congress passes a budget I don't think
we'll have those answers.
There's some things in there that he propose
obviously I don't agree with him.
I'm on the Chesapeake Bay Commission.
We've made huge strides in cleaning up the
bay.
We need to keep the momentum going.
We are really turning the corner in Chesapeake
Bay.
I feel very strongly about the efforts we
made.
Virginia has contributed literally billions
of dollars over the years in terms of upgrading
our sewage treatment plants.
In terms of working with our farmers to keep
livestock out of our streams and working with
our farmers to put in buffer zones around
the field so that the fields don't run right
into the stream.
Many things.
And we're seeing the results of that.
We need to keep that momentum going.
So there's certainly things in every budget
I can pick apart.
In terms of the policy...
look those immigrants that commit crimes and
they're here illegally need to go.
Period.
OK.
Illegal immigration means you're here illegally.
Now I believe that a vibrant guest worker
program where we invite people I'm not just
talking guest Mexican I'm talking guest Indian
guest Filipino guest Korean guests all over
the world come to our country do the things
that perhaps Americans are not there or are
you know we need your help to fill in that
workload whether it's whether it's you know
harvesting crops or you know finishing cement
or so many of the things that the immigrants
do making money go home.
If you do that you're welcome back another
trip to come back and do work you know back.
I think a vibrant guest worker program would
solve a lot of the problems of people wanting
to come here illegally if they knew they could
come here work and go back home again and
bring their money with them.
It's the best foreign aid that I can ever
think of.
Before we wrap up let me just throw out a
couple off speed pitches.
Sure.
When you were growing up other than become
governor one day, what was your dream job?
I had my dream job I was a Navy hard diver.
It was it was fascinating.
I got a chance to go underwater some not so
nice.
You know a lot of work underneath ships a
lot of cold water a lot of dirty water.
Naples harbor a few other places that strike
my mind.
But just just the opportunity to go under
water serve your country but work around some
of the best professionals I've ever worked
around the other divers I worked around.
Is that your preferred way to unwind when
you're not in Richmond?
Oh I'm probably my my preferred way of unwinding
is playing golf.
I mean I'm not sure I unwind when I play it.
You know I certainly am frustrated but but
every once in a while you make that good shot
and you think I'll be on the Seniors golf
tour.
You know they're going to be calling me any
minute now any minute now to put me on the
Seniors and then back to reality on the next
hole.
But it's fun and I enjoy the camaraderie with
the other golfers and it's a chance to not
feel like you're on stage as a senator but
it's a chance to relax
Well thank you very much for talking with
us today.
Really appreciate.
It's been wonderful.
Thank you so much.